[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I had my own story, just of
my own life, my own upbringing,
my own background, and divorced
parents and all that type
of thing, growing up in
inner city of Los Angeles,
struggling, all of that.
I was a teenage parent
when I was young.
My son was born like, a
month after my 16th birthday.
Probably like all
people, there's
a time when there is no
money, and then there's money,
and then there's no money again.
It's kind of how life works out.
But I remember there was a time
early on there was no money.
And I think because
of that, I really
wanted to be very successful.
I didn't know how
to be successful.
I didn't know what to do.
I didn't know how to do it.
So I continued
learning on my own.
Did tons of training,
attended tons of seminars,
spent thousands and
thousands and thousands
of dollars in self-help
on books and seminars.
I mean, you name it,
I did it, because I
wanted to change my life.
And it did work.
Over time, it was just
like building a muscle.
You have to keep working it.
I was on a huge upswing.
Business was going great.
Life was great.
I remember, I was 25
years old at the time,
and I was making over a
quarter of a million a year.
And I remember I did what any
normal 25-year-old kid would
do.
I bought cars, and
big screen TVs,
and went to Vegas probably
way too many times,
more than I had to, but that
was my life at the time.
At 25 years old, I
was living it up.
I remember I bought
a yellow Ferrari.
I guess I wanted people to
recognize me or pay attention
to me.
And I'll never forget this one
day, I pulled up at a light.
Normally, if you're
in a yellow Ferrari,
people tend to notice you, and
they weren't looking at me.
And I look over at
the car next to me,
which looked like to be
the husband and the wife,
and there's two kids
in the backseat,
and they had this little dog.
The kids were laughing and the
parents are just looking over
and they just looked like they
were having such a good time,
and I remember, I never
forget this feeling of looking
over and being jealous.
Here I am, this kid, I'm at
the top of what I thought
was my life then, and I
look over at these people,
probably living a
totally average life,
and I was very jealous of
that, because that was missing.
My life was nothing--
nothing like that.
It was definitely not average.
And that's when I realized that
I was rich financially, what
I thought at the time, but
very broke emotionally,
and that began my
journey, my search
to look for something more.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Like many other human beings,
what prompts the question is
often pain.
The existential crisis
of why am I here?
Why is this situation
the way it is?
Growing up in a tumultuous,
difficult situation
caused me to wonder what
I could do about it.
Why am I feeling
stuck at my job?
Why am I feeling like
a rat in a wheel cage
or something like that,
doing the same thing,
getting the same results?
How do I get out of that set of
conditions and preconceptions
so that I can get a
different set of results?
It starts by asking
that question.
There's no doubt that
some of us grew up
in environments that are
very different, but all of us
have the ability to
take responsibility.
And even if you've had a, quote
unquote, "rough life," a lot
of challenges, a lot
of blocks on your path,
you can meet that challenge.
>> There's billboards
everywhere,
have you been in a car accident?
It's not your fault.
Call us today and we'll
sue the pants off of them.
Like, no one wants to take
responsibility for anything
that they do, for their
behavior, for their driving,
for anything.
When you look at the
masses, the average person
makes tons of excuses
in their life,
but the primary person
that they make excuses to
is not to others,
it's to themselves.
>> Well, I have a
reason why I'm this way.
Sure, you do.
However, where are
you at right now?
Do you want to make a
change at this point,
or do you just need a hug?
>> So many people will accept
part of it and say, yes,
but, and then as soon as they
say the but, it denies what you
just said yes to and presents
what you really believe
your excuse, the reason
it's so hard for you.
That's your excuse.
Well, that excuse is not valid.
You may think it's valid, but
there's plenty of other people
that have had equally as bad
an upbringing as you've had,
in fact, a lot worse.
So I could sit down with any
one of you, look at your excuse,
and find a way to
present an option.
>> Our perception of the
world is massively distorted,
because our perception is only
based on our own experiences,
our own personal
views, our own beliefs,
and it's based on what we were
taught and what we learned.
And whatever we perceive to
be true, whether it is true
or whether it's complete
BS, when we get out there,
we will project that
out onto the world.
>> Feelings of
lack of worthiness,
don't be proud of what you look
like, don't be so confident,
that programming comes in in
childhood and continues all
the way through adulthood.
And unless you go and
you rewrite this story,
you can have a repeat of
the same type of story
as you get older.
It'll just be a
more complicated,
sophisticated version of
it, but ultimately, it'll
be a sad story.
>> Those beliefs that we
got in the first place were
our subconscious accepting
the fact that it isn't easy.
Life is a struggle.
Money is hard to make.
All these beliefs we've
heard from other people
we accept as being
the way the world is.
The simple truth is
that our beliefs are not
true in themselves.
They become true in our
experience if we believe them.
>> So if we have those types
of beliefs that really wire up
the brain, we must
first identify,
how can I go back and basically
disconnect from that old view?
>> All of us have
resistance somewhere.
If you look deep enough,
you'll find that place
that you don't want to go, the
place you don't want to look.
It's too uncomfortable,
it's too scary.
And I would argue that that's
where the hot stuff is.
And then we can go
deeper and find out
about a person's identity.
What is it that they
believe about themselves
that is causing them
to behave that way?
If you're getting poor results,
less than desired results
from your unconscious
mind, it means that there's
some bad programming in there.
It means that there's some
outdated software that needs
to be updated and upgraded.
And that's what NLP and
hypnosis is all about.
It's doing work to
rewrite the software,
rewrite the story so
that you can ultimately
get a different story.
>> The important thing isn't
our physical environment at all.
The important
thing is our minds.
I know from experience
we can set it in motion.
>> Many people don't always
understand about how the world
works and how energy works
and things like that,
but there are these energy
waves everywhere around us.
Couple hundred years
ago, somebody just
figured out how to latch on
to them like radio waves.
The energy was always there.
So you can now talk from
anywhere in the world
to any other part of the world.
And what I think people don't
give themselves enough credit,
we don't realize that we are the
most powerful, human, walking,
talking transmission towers
on the entire planet.
And just like your cell
phone, that little box
is constantly sending
and receiving signals.
But so are people,
so much so that we
could walk into a room full of
strangers, not know anybody,
see somebody way over the
other side of the room,
we don't know the person,
but something about them
draws us to them.
Why?
We all give off this vibe.
We hear that all the
time, oh, their vibe.
They have a nice vibe, a good
vibe, they have a weird vibe.
And vibe is short for
vibration, and vibration
is the equivalent as frequency.
And we can have a high
frequency or a low frequency.
So many of us don't say,
I'm in a high vibration
or low vibration.
We just say I feel
good or I feel bad.
It's not just positive
thinking, because I'm
not a positive thinker at all.
I'm not one of these people that
just says be happy all the time
and think positive and all that.
I'm not really one
of those people.
But I also do
understand the power
of holding a view
or a belief so much
so for something you
want until fruition,
until the thing is created.
>> And the key there
is dare to dream,
and keep the end in mind.
If we envision and imagine
a greater, better life
for ourselves, and we keep
focusing on that vision,
doubts and fears arise, and
it seems the vision crumbles,
but then we get back to it.
I heard a wonderful
thing a while ago,
that a plane is off course
over 95% of the time,
but the pilot keeps
correcting over and over
and over, and it
reaches its destination.
When I first heard
of that, I thought,
that's the story of my life.
Just doesn't work to pray for
something once, to ask once.
The frustration and anxiety and
excuses cancel out that wish.
You've got to come back to the
wish, to the dream, to asking.
Every day, keep asking.
Show me the next step to take.
I do think 99% of the effective
work I've done to transform
my life has been internal.
As Eckhart as in "The
Power of Now," get
the inside right and the
outside will fall into place.
I am sensible and in
control of my finances.
I'm creating total
financial success
in an easy and relaxed manner,
a healthy and positive mood,
in its own perfect time for
the highest good of all.
>> When you get back
to the realization,
the understanding of the one
thing that you have control
over is your ability to align
yourself with the thing that
you actually want energetically,
it just depends how long does
it take for you to align
yourself with that thing.
Because at first, there's
this like, confusion or doubt,
and then you get to this
point it's like, OK,
I think it's possible.
It's like, I think
it is possible.
You get to like, hope.
This is the positive
thinking part of you.
It's like, I hope
this works out.
And then you get this
other place like,
I really believe this
is going to work out.
And then you finally
get to this place of
like, I don't care what or how,
but this is going to happen.
This thing is done.
It's complete.
It's complete in my mind.
It's complete in my body.
It's complete in my soul.
I am there before I
actually get the thing.
And you need to
hold that alignment
and give the world
and people and things,
circumstances, an opportunity
to work out for you.
>> It's all about creating
something out of apparently
nothing.
To me, I look at it as a
completely magical process,
in a way.
You don't have to use
those words at all.
You can just say strategic
planning has its results,
whatever words you want to use.
But for me, what
it does get down to
is the basic, deep mystery
of all of creation.
We can channel that force, if
you will, or we can ask for it.
We can bring it into our minds.
>> There is a famous occultist
from the Victorian era
in England, and his name was
Aleister Crowley, and he said,
magic is the art and science
of causing change to happen
in accordance with one's will.
By visualizing that
future moment, putting
in a set of
instructions, and then
when I let go, turn my
attention away from it,
my unconscious mind will be
drawn towards experiencing it,
effortlessly, easily.
It will seem like the
right thing to do.
It will seem as though
I'm compelled to do that.
It'll be automatically
arising from the way
I've made sense of that
reality moving forward.
There are a lot of
different ways to do this.
Is it really magic?
Depends on how you
define magic, doesn't it?
>> My name is Dean Radin.
I'm the chief scientist at the
Institute of Noetic Sciences.
One of the things that
we do at this institute
is study experiences that
people report very commonly that
challenge the prevailing
scientific idea about who
and what we are.
And so these experiences
range from simple intuition,
like gut feelings,
to psychic phenomena,
to mystical experience.
We're interested,
then, in when somebody
has a transformative
experience of this type,
and there's a pretty
large range of them.
And we also gain some
sense that the experiences
that they have are real and
not just an illusion, then
how do we begin to
understand them?
Most of what we do in
the scientific sense
is in the laboratory.
We use methods like high-density
EEG to look at brain activity.
We use psychophysiological
methods
to look at how the brain and
body are related to each other.
We use methods in physics,
methods in computer science
and statistics.
So the magic I'm talking
about, first of all,
is not Harry Potter, and
it's not Harry Houdini.
Those are both fictional magic.
I'm talking about
the real stuff.
So real magic consists
of three categories.
The first category we
can call divination.
It's the idea that
your mind can perceive
through space and time.
From a materialistic
point of view,
we don't know how that
can happen very easily.
From an idealistic point
of view, it has to happen.
It is the way things are.
The second category
I call force of will,
which from a
scientific perspective,
we might use terms like
mind-matter interaction
or psychokinetic effects.
And that's the notion that
your intention, your will,
can manifest.
It makes things happen.
The third category is theurgy.
In practice, it's about evoking
spirits in ceremonial magic
where you try to get spirits
to do things on your behalf.
So the reason I got
interested in magic
is because for
most of my career,
I've been studying
parapsychological phenomena,
telepathy and
clairvoyance and so on,
and after studying the
esoteric literature even just
for a little bit, I realized
that what we had been studying
in the laboratory is
exactly what people have
called traditional magic.
Divination is clairvoyance
and precognition.
Force of will is
psychokinetic effects.
Theurgy are phenomena like
near-death experiences
and medium shift.
So because I was surprised at
having spent almost 40 years
studying these phenomena
and not realizing
that is what traditional
magic is about,
I decided to write this
book to express essentially
what I discovered,
which to other people
might seem, well, of course
it that is the way it is.
How did you not even know that?
Part of it is because I went
through the academic tradition,
where we assume a certain
view of the world.
And in that view of the world,
ideas of traditional magic
are laughable.
It cannot be the case.
>> My background and interest in
spirituality and science really
is a lifelong passion.
Because I started
as a young child
being very aware of
the fact that there
is this deeper level
of consciousness
connecting all of us.
I wanted to find
out more about that
and get into the science of it.
So I chose to go to
UC Berkeley, where
I got my degree in physics.
And my main focus of
interest in the program
had to do with quantum physics,
which I found tremendously
intuitive for me.
There has been a lot
of emphasis on the idea
that magical thinking
doesn't work.
But actually, it turns
out, magical thinking
is pretty powerful.
Because in the quantum realm,
the realm of imagination
is the king.
That's the foundation
for everything.
Consciousness is primary.
>> A lot of people who are
attracted to magic in the first
place, they don't
care how it works.
They don't even care about the
debate over whether it exists.
They just want to use it.
So the two simple
forms that have
been used as far back as
we can see in history,
one is called writing
magic, and the other
is called sigil magic.
So these are very
elementary practices.
But both of them have persisted
throughout history, probably
because they do something.
So from a psychological
perspective,
you can say, well, the act of
writing down what you want,
that will just
psychologically predispose you
to seeing that happening.
But the question is, whether it
actually does cause the world
to be different.
So that's kind of what we
study in the laboratory,
not so far these
magical practices,
but things like that where
you make very strong intention
and then you see whether it
changes something in the world.
Sigil magic is like
writing magic except that,
instead of writing something
down, you make a symbol for it
to stand for the
thing that you want.
Once you have that
shape, the symbol
itself will remind
you of the intention.
You use whatever method
is necessary in order
to put all of your
intention into that symbol,
like push through the
symbol to make it happen.
And then, as is seen in
the laboratory a lot,
there's something called the
release of effort effect.
That while you're pushing like
crazy with your intention,
nothing's going to happen.
It happens when you release.
So with the sigil magic as well.
You push really hard
through this symbol.
And then you might burn it.
You might put it
away in a drawer.
You get rid of it
somehow so that you
allow the intention to go do
whatever it's going to do.
>> Some people think
this is something weird.
And what I'd like
people to realize
is that basically, every time
we make a choice in our mind,
we're actually making
a quantum jump.
Quantum jumping is
such a big field
that there's a lot
that falls within it.
Everything from--
the placebo effect
is, I think, an
excellent example of it,
to finding lost things, to
suddenly having skill sets
and abilities where you didn't
have those capabilities before.
These are all things
that are possible.
There's really no end in sight.
Pretty much anything
that you would wish for
is attainable,
because we're looking
at the nature of reality
itself and the way that you're
interacting with it.
So the steps involved.
So do you get a
quantum jump from being
in one state of being, maybe
being sick to being well,
for example?
That's a good one.
The way that you
can make that jump
is to start by getting into
that relaxed, energized state
of being.
So things that are
conducive to that
would be meditation,
lucid dreaming.
You can think of that as being
in a theta state of mind.
It's like a daydream
state of mind.
And just make that a
regular part of your life.
So that you feel
like, OK, this is
how it feels to just
not have any worries.
You feel energized and relaxed.
The more you do it,
also, it gets easier.
So that's good.
Then the next step
is to really feel
that you're making a selection
of where you'd like to go.
Sometimes we don't know
where we want to go.
I like to then ask,
how good can it get?
And let that unfold naturally.
You're talking to your
subconscious when you do that.
Your subconscious
knows what's good.
You will go to the right place.
And so that's a natural
way to guide yourself.
But if you have a clear
view, I want to get healthy,
then you can have
that picture in mind.
To the degree your subconscious
believes that's possible,
that dictates the degree of
success you're about to have.
So I recommend,
keep an open mind,
read lots of
stories and accounts
of miracles, these magical
happenings, these reality
shifts.
Third part is just, act as if
it already happened and you
behave accordingly.
And it sounds crazy,
but people experience
what they're able to experience
based on the energy they bring,
what their subconscious
really needs.
Because your subconscious is
in the driver's seat here.
And what you really
believe and what you need
is what you're going
to end up getting,
pretty much all the time.
When you need it to
happen, it will happen.
And when you're open minded,
you've brought that energy,
this is basically the
science of miracles.
>> So in the popular sense,
this notion is sometimes thought
of as, you create
your own reality,
that your ideas will manifest.
That's where the
idea of affirmations
comes from and to some
extent, positive psychology.
You can trace that
line of thought
all the way back to shamanism.
It is part of the
esoteric tradition.
So then somebody
could say, well,
then how come if I want to
have world peace tomorrow,
I'm thinking about it,
it's not happening.
So what am I doing wrong?
Or I want to have a
big, big pile of gold.
I don't see it, so that
model must be wrong.
My interpretation of that is
that the conscious level mind
where this is happening, this
is not where the action happens.
All of the action happens at
a much deeper level of mind.
It's a little bit like
looking at an iceberg.
The tip of the iceberg,
you can see it.
That's their
conscious awareness.
But most of it by far
is below the surface.
And that's where
the action happens.
>> So it's not just a matter
of telling yourself once a day,
I can do this, and lots of
people like me succeed at this.
You're going to need to address
the issues of your heart
and of your subconscious
and your gut, all of that.
And the best way to do that is
to start listening to yourself.
A lot of people don't do that.
They think, I'm just going
to tell myself what to do,
and it's all going to work.
>> So one of the reasons why
I wish for a golden Mercedes
and it doesn't show up
is because we have lots
of unconscious things that
are working against us.
We know that we have
self-defeating behaviors,
otherwise we wouldn't see
levels of obesity that we have
and people wouldn't drink
and smoke as much as they do.
So you may consciously
say, I'm not
going to eat this cookie
because it's not good for me.
But you will find your hand
going to get the cookie
and then it will
pick up the cookie
and it will bring it to your
mouth and you will eat it.
It's part of your
unconscious that
can override your
conscious awareness.
So this is one of the reasons
why meditation as a practice
is useful, not only for
mental and physical health,
but is essential when
it comes to things
like magical practice.
In the magical traditions,
what a yogi might call samadhi,
which is the very deep
levels of mystical unity,
a magician will call gnosis.
And all of the
magical traditions
say that for magic to
work, you have to do it
from the level of gnosis.
Well, most people
don't go there.
It's not easy to get there
because the world is constantly
pulling our attention away.
But that's what's necessary.
>> It seems simple
to do a quantum jump.
But that doesn't mean it's easy.
And I do martial arts and
they say the same thing there.
Some of these things are simple.
They're not necessarily easy.
And with quantum jumping,
there's so much involved,
starting with this whole
notion of attaining
a relaxed, energized state.
And often, when people are
suffering, when there's true
misery, when they're actually
engaged with survival
issues and real
difficult challenges,
then it might be very difficult
to get to that place of feeling
relaxed and energized.
And then the next step of
envisioning something positive
can be equally challenging
if your entire history
has been based on nothing
good really happening.
If you don't know what
love is, for example,
it's hard to picture
what that feels like.
If you don't know unconditional
support and compassion,
it's hard to imagine it.
There can be all kinds of
challenges along the way.
It's still doable,
but that needs
to be a discipline of
working in that direction.
>> A lot of people who do
affirmations will just try
to harangue their
consciousness to death.
If you waste time saying, I'm a
millionaire, I'm a millionaire,
I'm a millionaire, I'm a
but then you're not
sending your resumes out,
you're not coming up
with a product or service
or talking to entrepreneurs
and figuring out
what you can do to
be a millionaire,
what are you doing
wasting time trying
to convince yourself of
something you don't really
believe?
I don't want to work.
I just want it to come to me.
Yeah, we probably all want that.
We all want just a million
dollars to come to us.
Thinking doesn't make things so.
You still have to take
action in the world
and you've got to get results.
You got to prove that
it's true for you.
I don't work with
my clients and just
do a bunch of magical
actions with them
and expect that their whole
world changes in that moment.
We are going to shift some
things at a feeling level.
We're going to go in.
We're going to change how you
feel about it so that you take
action, so that you start to
acquire the things that you
do want.
You feel motivated to do it
and you take action on it.
I want to do that action now.
Expand your comfort zone.
Start with what you have.
>> The older I get,
the clearer I see it.
And I think there's just
two essential things.
The first is, dare to
imagine doing what you love.
And then the other
essential thing
is just, deal with the doubts
and fears that will inevitably
arise when you dare to dream.
The more expansive
the dream, the bigger
the doubts and fears.
You can deal with those.
The only real
failure is quitting.
Just don't quit.
Within every adversity is
an equal or greater benefit.
You turn your thinking around.
When you've got a major
problem happening,
shift your thinking by
just asking yourself,
what opportunities are in this?
>> There is a part of us that
needs to allow for that magic
to happen.
And we have to know that
there is this force,
there is this thing, you know?
Whether it's God, whether
it's the universe, whatever
you believe, in some
way, at some level,
your life is trying to
communicate with you.
You can be walking through
the living room at your house.
The kids or your
partner, somebody
watching a movie or a
commercial, something
just in passing, and there's
a slight little phrase,
a little thing that the person
on the other side of the movie
said.
You didn't pay attention
to anything else.
But in those three
seconds, five seconds,
you heard something they said.
And every one of those
things is intuition.
It's planting a seed in
the garden of the mind.
It's our job to be
able to quiet the noise
because intuition
comes like a whisper.
And it's so quiet and
so light and so soft.
Many people miss it
because of all of the noise
that they've created
in their life.
>> So the main thing I recommend
is people start by meditating.
If you go on a walk
and you're in nature,
that's a perfect time to just
pay attention to your breathing
as you're walking.
It's all about getting back
to an observer state of being,
where you notice that you're
not the problems in your life.
You're not the
role that you play.
You're not the thoughts
that you think.
You're the observer of that.
So you're the one who is making
the choice in all these things.
And you have a lot more choice
than you thought you did.
I pick up expectations and
fears and doubts and misgivings
about things that have happened.
And if I let that clog up
my entire cognitive system,
then pretty soon,
all of my decisions
are being based on
my fears, my doubts.
So meditation helps me
clear out those beliefs that
get in the way.
It's just like
clogging things up.
Just like you need
to vacuum your house
and clean your refrigerator.
You need to clean your mind.
>> What is meditation?
Can we simplify it?
Can the normal person,
the average person
do it without
leaving their home,
without leaving their job?
What does it take to meditate?
How do we do it?
What happens when
the mind settles down
and the body settles down and
our sense of self disappears?
I teach a lot of
essentials for meditation.
But the three ingredients we
all have, gentle attention,
a willingness to
sit down and do it,
and then something
to pay attention to.
And you come back
again and again
and again and again to the
focus of your meditation,
whether it's your breath
or mantra, whether it's
a candle flame or an emotion.
And no matter how many
times you go off topic,
you come back
again, again, again.
So a lot of people
say, I can't meditate.
And I say, why?
And they say, I don't
have enough time.
I say, well, how much
time do you stand
in line for a cup of coffee?
How much time do you spend
on social media on the web?
And I say, take
10 minutes of that
and turn it back to yourself.
And asking that
question, who am I?
Who am I really?
Who is it that's
living through me,
that's looking through my eyes?
>> Consciousness is so
obvious that for many people,
they don't even know what
you're talking about.
Most academics, and this is now
true everywhere in the world,
are taught according to
principles that have developed
within Western science.
That scientific
worldview is based
on a philosophical
set of assumptions
known as materialism.
So materialism, in
a nutshell, means
that everything is made
out of matter and energy,
including mind,
including consciousness,
including everything we
know about subjectivity.
That's the prevailing view.
So if you're
challenging that view,
you have the same problem
that you would in any domain
where you start
challenging the status quo.
The status quo doesn't
like to be challenged.
So it will push hard against
anything that challenges it
in an attempt to squash it.
This is the problem
with materialism.
Materialism doesn't know what
to do with consciousness.
So it sort of sets it aside.
We'll worry about that later.
Or it comes up with the
idea that somehow the brain
is complex enough that it
gives rise to experience, even
though nobody has any idea
how that could possibly be.
And we know that
materialism is pretty good,
because it gives
us the technology
to do this sort of an interview
with a special machine that
captures my image and so on.
So we don't want to
throw materialism away.
It's too good.
The question is,
is it good enough
to account for everything?
And here's where we
have the problem.
Clearly it is not accounting
for all of the experiences
that people talk about.
So what's missing?
When you look at the
esoteric traditions,
you immediately bump
up against what might
be thought of as proto science.
So alchemy, astrology,
and herbalism.
Alchemy was the
forerunner of chemistry.
Astrology is a forerunner of
astronomy, to some extent.
And herbalism is the
forerunner of pharmaceuticals.
What's interesting
is that historically,
all three of those
proto sciences
also had a fourth element in it,
the element of consciousness,
where the practitioner
of alchemy
or the practitioner of
astrology or herbalism
knew that their intention was
a very important component
of what they were doing.
This is true in each case.
And yet, science has
stripped that out.
You don't consider
when you take a pill
that your intention is
important, except maybe
as a placebo.
But certainly when you're
preparing something
like metals or in chemistry,
people don't think about that.
But that was part of
the original idea.
And so I think what
is happening now
is that science is
slowly beginning
to mature to the point where
it sees that the intention
and consciousness
of the scientist
is as important an ingredient as
it was in alchemy and astrology
and so on.
So I looked in detail at
the esoteric traditions,
all the way back
from shamanism to
Pythagoras, Eastern
traditions, all the way up
to the present time.
And you find that there's a
similar thread of thought.
And basically, they're saying
that a better model of reality
is idealism, that everything
is made out of mind,
including matter.
That solves, at one stroke--
if that method is correct, if
that assumption is correct,
it solves all of the puzzles
about psychic phenomena
and mysticism and
all of that stuff.
So now consciousness
came here first.
And so the scientific
challenge is,
how do we get from
pure awareness
to emerge into space and
time and matter and energy?
How do we do that?
Well, there are lots of people
working on that very problem.
How do you emerge out
of something that seems
non-physical into physicality?
>> When we recognize that every
single material thing at its
core is energy and
everything is vibrating,
then you can get a feeling for
this nature of existence that
is not as materially
real as we tend to think.
And to me, that's what
it's really about,
that the nature
of reality itself
is consciousness
looking at itself.
It's basically a feedback loop.
So we're looking at the outside
world realizing, wait a minute.
Maybe what we're seeing
is consciousness itself.
And it starts to seem,
that is the case.
So we're at a time
in our history
where quantum physics
is challenging all of us
to take a whole new look at
the way we see the world.
>> Some scientists who strongly
resist this are of the opinion
that we basically understand
how reality works.
There's a couple of things
left over to mop up,
but we kind of got it.
I think that view
is so arrogant.
And even just from a
historical perspective,
you see about every 20 years
some prominent scientist
saying, well, it's
all wrapped up.
We just have these one or
two things left to fix,
and then we got it all.
It's just stupid
from my perspective.
Science is young.
And we have far
more things that we
don't understand
fundamentally at all
than we do understand
a little bit.
And that's one of the
fears that arises then.
Saying, well, I've spent my
entire career as a professor,
professing certain ideas
about the way things work.
And you're coming to me
and saying, actually,
you didn't understand
that at all.
Well, that's frightening.
I mean, no one wants
to think that they
don't know what's going on.
This is one of the reasons
why the Institute of Noetic
Sciences is a private,
non-profit institution.
Because we're looking
at things that do
challenge the status quo.
You can't do this in
the academic world.
We were among the first to
support research on meditation,
research on the positive
psychological and health
consequences of things
like gratefulness
and forgiveness, mind-body
connections in health
and so on.
We were supporting
these kinds of ideas
at a time when they
were considered
laughable and extremely risky.
So if somebody wants to
live a comfortable life,
the easiest thing to do is to
go along with the flow, always.
And if someone has
a family and they
have children to
support and all that,
it is actually the
responsible thing
for the sake of the
rest of the family,
to not challenge the status quo.
We live in a society
that is constantly
pushing certain ways to be.
And among other
things, we are not
taught to think for ourselves
or to think critically
or to question our own motives
and our unconscious desires.
It requires taking risk.
But so what?
Life is a risk.
>> It's a challenge to face
up to a lot of opposition.
Collectively, there
is a driving force
that tends to move events
in a certain direction.
And if you've ever
gone up against it,
it can feel like a
fish swimming upstream.
Like you're going in one
direction and everyone else
is going somewhere else.
The more you go into this
practice of meditation
and the more you recognize
that you are a consciousness,
I would not say it
becomes easy, but it
becomes possible to
stand up to society,
to your parents, or
your internalization
of what you think your
parents want for you.
And the funny thing about
doing this quantum jumping
is, often you'll notice that
people seem like they change.
And where there had
been opposition,
now there's support.
>> I know a lot of people have
a struggle with their parents
because their parents aren't
supporting them in doing what
they love.
Their parents have
a different idea.
My father certainly did.
He was concerned for me.
Going into theater and music
did not seem like a good idea.
He wanted me to
go into business.
And I realized, I
got deep somehow,
that it doesn't do any good
to do what your parents want.
You have to do what you want.
But it doesn't do any
good to fight them either.
So I just ignored my father.
He complained to my brother.
He said, Mark is so
slippery, you know?
He just blows me off.
He doesn't fight me.
He doesn't object.
He just sort of slides away.
>> One of the requisites of
change is that you have to deal
with objections at home or in
whatever environment you go
back to.
So let's say you want to do a
lot of work on your identity.
All of a sudden, you're
awakening your ability
to cause changes in
accordance with your will.
You're starting to tap into
feelings of worthiness,
starting to feel strong.
But then you go home.
And these people
have a picture of you
that is not the picture that
you're working to become.
It's the old you.
And it may not even be accurate,
but it's their image of you.
And I think you
can say, hey, look.
I'm really working on this.
This is really, really
important to me.
This is who I'm
working to become.
I'd really love to
count on your support.
I know you're just kidding,
but I'd appreciate it
if you just cut it out for now.
And if you don't
respect that, I'm
going to have to
ask you to leave.
I'm just going to not
hang out with you.
I don't want someone else
to sabotage right now.
It might mean not responding.
It might mean hardening
yourself psychologically to be
able to handle it.
You can't always ask
other people to change.
Most of the time, they won't.
>> Not everybody
really wants help.
One thing I've learned
the hard way in this field
is, some people just
want to complain.
Some people want to
complain about the problem
and don't actually want
to resolve the problem.
And we've all had friends
or heard of somebody
that, they always seem
to find themselves
in the same type of scenario,
the same type of issue,
the same relationship, even
though with three or four
different people,
it's the same story.
It's like, look, you're always
attracting people like this.
Something is going on
with you internally
that you need to
resolve in order to move
on to the next level of life.
But not everybody
really wants to change.
It's very possible, but you also
must believe, have the faith
that it's possible.
And then just align yourself
with the people out there
that are also on the same
wavelength, so to speak.
And stay away from
the people that
are going to drag you down.
And we really need
to dictate and decide
up front how much time
we are willing to put
into those friendships or those
partnerships or those people.
And you have to think
about that in advance.
You can't just let it work out
however it's going to work out.
Because it will suck
up all of your energy
and you have to keep your energy
intact and focus for the things
that are really most
important to you.
>> One of the best things
you can do is just set a good
example.
And it's hard to help people
unless they ask for help.
So I don't recommend pushing
your values on someone else
unless they ask you,
like, what are you doing?
Otherwise probably that's
not their path right now.
You need to be your own
example of being the change
that you wish to
see in the world.
>> Everything happens
exactly as it should.
And then it's a
very unique place
to be able to be grateful
for where we are today,
grateful for what
you have, grateful
for what we've
accomplished, grateful
for all your experiences.
Yet at the same
time, be able to want
or expect or allow more
to continue to come in.
>> Life can be very complicated
and difficult when people are
grasping all the time.
And I think when
we're constantly
achieving something new instead
of celebrating what is, we
become less and less satisfied.
It's like a drug.
Money is a drug.
Sex is a drug.
Shopping is a drug.
It's a bottomless pit,
trying to satisfy ourselves.
>> This culture, especially
in the United States,
this society really has
this succeed, excel.
It's the consumer mentality.
Do more, buy more,
be more, have more.
A bigger house,
bigger car, fill up
a garage full of 10,000
rolls of toilet paper,
and buy as much as you can.
And people have garages and
storages and more stuff.
And they have so
much stuff, they
can't even store the stuff.
They have to pay for a place to
store the stuff that they can't
even store at their own house.
And this is the way people live.
Just because you
have more externally,
it doesn't always correlate
to being internally fulfilled.
Those are two completely
different things.
And external, your environment,
the house, the cars, the stuff
is never fulfilling.
Its short term.
You get the fulfillment.
You buy it.
You have it.
You play with it.
And you get the short term,
instant gratification type
of thing.
But just like a
child with a new toy,
you run out of motivation
after a little while.
And you're on to the next toy.
>> The ultimate insanity
of it was the '80s.
I remember a guy, he actually
had a bumper sticker saying,
whoever dies with
the most toys wins.
And I remember thinking, wrong.
That's not true.
It's not about amassing
more and more toys.
True, when you're
poor, there's a lot
of stress about
paying the bills.
But going purely
for material success
will never achieve
the satisfaction
that we're all
looking for in life.
You've got to be careful
to keep your life simple,
because the kingdom
of heaven is within.
>> I think more and more,
conscious business owners have
to start thinking in terms of,
there's enough for everyone.
More often than not,
there are solutions.
There are ways to
be more inclusive.
You can find that, hey, if I'm
doing hypnosis and hypnotherapy
and all sorts of wonderful
stuff and there's
someone else who
does it near me,
well, why do I have to
see them as a competitor?
Why not introduce myself?
Why not connect and think about,
how can we benefit each other?
There is enough of
the resources, money,
people around that if you
have a good product, if you
have a good service,
there's enough for everyone.
>> John Templeton
put it so simply.
He said, the way to get wealthy
is to make others wealthy.
But I kind of think
on this planet,
there has been progress made.
And we do take two steps forward
and then sometimes a huge step
back as the old systems
are thrashing out
fighting for survival.
And in the long run, I
would think the world view
based on love and partnership,
working it out with everybody,
realizing we are
one global family.
>> We're in some ways,
experiencing a dark time.
In some ways, we're
experiencing a renaissance.
And so there are some threats
to our existence right now.
But we also have
more and more people
who are paying attention,
and more and more people
who are looking for
solutions in areas
that we didn't look before.
Get out there and do
something nice for somebody.
And don't expect
anything in return.
Be kind.
People need it.
If we remember that the
people who we complain about
are human, that underneath
their beliefs and ideologies,
they're human beings,
it opens up our ability
to hear one another.
>> Sometimes we buy into
the materialistic world.
And we think that
we have no power.
We think that we're victims.
But actually, there's a great
deal more power in each of us
and all of us together
collectively than most of us
ever realize.
It's up to all of us
to encourage ourselves
and one another to maintain
that sense of who we really are.
Because I believe very
strongly that this
is the time in our
world history where
it's more important than
ever before that people
recognize this.
>> I think for those people who
don't settle down their nervous
system with meditation,
who don't have a spiritual
or creative practice, their
mind is constantly traveling
into the past, into the
future, and into other
people's business.
And when that
happens, they're not
present for themselves
and the world that's
being revealed to them.
A zen master might say,
show me the future.
Show me your past.
And there's no way to do it.
Those questions,
they stop the mind.
Your mind will
gyrate a little bit,
and then eventually,
it settles down.
We dive into the
source of everything.
We started naming some
of the qualities of it.
It's eternal.
It's ever present.
It's intelligent.
That's the
transcendence, is when
we lose track of time and
space and we transcend
the element of materialism.
But we can't just go
there because we want to.
Will doesn't have
much to do with it.
You cannot will your
mind to stop thinking.
You cannot will desires
to be made manifest.
You cannot will enlightenment.
You can't will it.
It just happens on its
own accord, spontaneously.
You have to be present
and here it comes.
That's how I navigate life
from, with faith, patience,
and grace.
>> But we sometimes
get a feeling, like,
there's something
else going on here,
that there is something
much more connected.
That in a very real sense,
we're sharing the same dream.
And so I recognize that I'm,
in some ways, playing a role.
But who I really am
is so much bigger,
so much more mysterious.
It's eternal.
It's infinite.
It's timeless.
It's connected to everything.
Then there's this
collaboration, a symphony
of all these different,
harmonious pieces,
each of us playing a
part of the overall song
and that this is the so-called
music of the spheres,
that it's our consciousness
that creates all of this.
And when we get there,
then that is oneness.
Because everything's
back together again,
but in such a way that we don't
know what we're looking at.
>> And we never actually know.
We hope we're getting
closer to understanding it.
But I sometimes suspect
that as humans, we
don't have the capacity
to actually understand
what's going on.
And I see this
reflected a little bit
when you have a mystic who
can go into mystical states.
They come back with a conviction
that, I understand it now.
I got it.
And say, well, tell me.
What is it?
And their response
is, it's ineffable.
I cannot describe it.
And the reason is that
language at the everyday level
is not capable of describing
what's actually going on.
Some mystics will say that they
come out of the mystical state.
And then they see the
world in a new way.
And everything is exactly
the way it's supposed to be.
>> I think mystics,
philosophers, poets,
they express the reality
better than maybe you or I.
Because they allude to it.
And that's the
same with waking up
to that which is looking
through your eyes.
You can call it
anything you want.
Some people call it Self with a
capital S. Some people call it
spirit, god, soul.
The great spirit,
consciousness itself, it's
that which animates all of this.
It's what's residing
at your deepest level.
>> The ancient notion of Indra's
Net is that it's this necklace
with lots of glittering
pieces of crystal in it.
And so each one is the universe.
But all the facets on it are
reflecting all of the others.
So we have this amazing
network of awareness,
which is seeing itself reflected
again and again and again
in an infinite number of ways.
So it's sort of simmering at
some universal, unconscious
level, trying to
wake up from a dream.
And when finally, whatever
we are understands it
or it understands itself, it
wakes up and the dream is over.
I see it as, you go
along in your daily life.
You are a certain way.
And then one day, you wake up.
And from that moment, everything
before that seems like a dream.
And you can wake
up multiple times.
So in my life, I
remember two instances
where just walking to class in
college one day in the morning,
I woke up.
I mean, it was a very
strange experience.
A little bit like, you're
sleeping and now you wake up
and you become aware.
There was a step
function, while walking
to class one morning, that
everything before that,
I felt as though I was sleeping.
And that this has
happened twice.
So I'm imagining that there
are many things that can
push that kind of experience.
The more awake you are and the
less dreaming you are, I think,
the closer to
enlightenment you get.
>> For me, enlightenment is to
attain that sense of self that
is pure consciousness.
And to recognize that
that's the real you.
That who you are is infinite,
is eternal, is connected.
And that's you
that's looking out
through your eyes, who is
so much wiser, so much more
connected, so much more
involved in everything.
And that's your true identity.
>> We are the creation
of the forces of life,
an eternal blend of
ecstasy and strife,
living as long as
the universe stays,
which is forever through the
galaxy's nights and days.
From the big bang's beginning
to the black hole's destruction
is but a day in the life
of our cosmic construction.
We'll live forever with the
stuff of stars, ever-changing,
ever-growing, born into
this life, born into death.
Changing this form for
the one that comes next.
An eternal part of
an eternal creation,
a quintessential piece
of divine revelation.
>> I am this creation.
[MUSIC PLAYING]